America has shown unwavering support for
Israel's war on Gaza critics say this
highlights its double standards and
could be a turning point in the world
order is the US strategy shortsighted
what damage could the war inflict on
America's Global standing this is Inside
[Music]
Story
hello there I'm James Bay Washington's
steadfast support for Israel's allout
assault on Palestinians in Gaza is
Shifting Global perceptions several
analysts and Arab leaders have warned
the US risk severe reputational damage
in the region if it continues to back
Israel while its forces bomb hospitals
schools and refugee camps initially
Western Powers were United in their
support for Israel's right to
self-defense after the Hamas offensive
in early October but the sheer magnitude
of the destruction and killing in Gaza
has seen several countries change their
stance and the Biden Administration has
been criticized for failing to pressure
Israel to declare a ceasefire the US is
no longer the world's only superpower
the emergence of several new alliances
could challenge American dominance so
where does this leave the US on the
international stage in this first
national address following Israel's war
on Gaza last month President Joe Biden
acknowledged the significance of the war
for the United States
we're facing an inflection point in
history one of those moments where the
decisions we make today are going to
determine the future for decades to come
American leadership is what holds the
world together American alliances what
keep us America safe American values are
what make us a partner that other
nations want to work with to put all
that at risk if we walk away from
Ukraine if we turn our backs on Israel
it's just not worth
it a recent poll shars the majority of
Americans nearly 70% backer Ceasar in
Israel's war on Gaza this is significant
particularly ahead of the 2024 elections
as the US gives Israel nearly $4 billion
dollar in military aid every year
accusations of hypocrisy are another
challenge for the Biden administrations
critics say the US has double standards
it's focused on human rights in Ukraine
but disregards them in Gaza China and
Russia have long called for a change in
the global order questions are being
raised about other countries looking to
form new alliances will team up with
them to challenge Western
dominance well let's bring in our panel
of guests to discuss this further in
Boston Ramy kurri Isam farz Institute
distinguished fellow at the American
University of Beirut Ramy is also the
author of a US pivot away from the
Middle East fact or fiction in London
Samuel Romani an associate fellow at the
Royal United Services Institute and a
milit milit and geopolitical analyst and
in Washington DC James Jeffrey a former
US ambassador to Iraq and Tura and
chairperson of the Middle East program
at the Wilson Center thank you gentlemen
for joining us today on the Inside Story
program we just heard President Biden
there let me just remind you what he
said we are facing an inflection point
in history one of the moments where the
decisions we make today are going to
determine the future for decades to come
he was speaking four weeks ago on
October the 20th um Ambassador Jeffrey
I'm gonna call you James from now on um
do you agree with him I
do
why uh the core American role in the
world since
48 and we have had many different roles
is to maintain a global collective
security system to ensure that major
Global actors do not start snuffing out
States destroying or use hamas's
language extinguish Other Nation States
because that puts us down the road to
World War I and World War II that is the
most important issue for US foreign
policy um Joe Biden sees it and he's
absolutely
right okay Ramy curri that was two weeks
into the war we're now six weeks into
the war rather a lot has changed the
death toll in Gaza has risen
dramatically Al it's not even being
counted anymore Israel has besieged
hospitals and ra ra and raided the
biggest one um Israel's also displaced
two-thirds of gaza's population and the
UN is now saying there's the risk of
starvation and chronic disease do you
think Biden now finds himself on the
wrong side of
History I think he probably does I don't
I don't think Biden or American leaders
really understand history that's the
real problem they've had so little of it
themselves in terms of global
engagements other than
military engagements uh and trade and so
there's a real problem in how the United
States deals with the world i' I've used
the phrase that the US deals with the
world as markets or targets markets for
trade and targets to attack or to
sanction um and the the record of the
United States since World War II uh has
not been uh very good in terms of using
its military in Vietnam and Afghanistan
and Iraq and Syria and other places so
the and and it supports these autocratic
countries all over the third world so
instead of preserving the states as as
Ambassador Jeffrey said the United
States is actually helping autocratic
regimes uh Hollow their States from
within if you look at places like Egypt
and and other places around the world
that the US supports severely and we see
the consequences of its allout support
for Israel which is expanding tension
and and warfare and and the US sending
huge amounts of military hardware to to
the region so there's a real problem in
how the US analyzes and engages with uh
the world Samuel that speech in the Oval
Office was also about the war in Ukraine
you've written the book Putin's war on
Ukraine you're a chronicler of the last
20 months in Ukraine we'll get to all
the detail of that in a minute but on
the the the inflection point in history
do you agree with
Biden well I think that obviously
Russia's full scale invasion of Ukraine
in February 2022 was an inflection point
in modern European history it was the
most Brazen assault on the sovereignty
of a European States since the end of
the second world war and Russia has also
described as an inflection point for the
broader Global Order when you look at
the statements from sery LA or Demitri
Mia you very often see that this
invasion of Ukraine is the start of a
challenge to the US Le Global Order and
and the start of a new multi-polar order
led by Russia and China but also
empowering the broader Global South and
Biden I think is touching upon the fact
that now sovereignty is being breached
in a more flagrant fashion and that's
definitely a problem for the Post Cold
War order but there are obviously also
American double standards as Ramy
pointed out that make his message even
though accurate on the sovereignty
question a bit hard for many across the
world to pet James if I can ask you
about the bombardment of Gaza and the
scale of the bombardment of Gaza among
the high level jobs that you have held
um in the US system you were the US
Special representative for Syria and the
uh presidential Envoy for the global
coalition to counter the Islamic State
of Iraq and the Levant Isis isil um and
I know you took up those jobs after the
battle of raka but if we compare what
happened in raqa to what happened um in
in um Gaza um there were 1,600 civilians
killed in the US Coalition air and
artillery strikes now I know those
aren't us figures they're figures from
from Amnesty International and from Air
Wars but even if you take those figures
perhaps you dispute them that means that
Israel has killed 10 times that number
in just six weeks and the the ra the
raka campaign went on for 11
months uh that's correct and there are
reasons for it I would also say a better
example because it's a bigger city was
mosul which I also um have looked at
closely in 2016 2017 where there are
some 10,000 civilian casualties uh first
of all uh Israel did not have the time
that we had in
201617 or
201 18 and Beyond with the Islamic State
it's mobilized it's in part of its
entire Workforce it is facing possible
escalation uh in the north possibly from
Iran and so it moved in in a very very
Rapid Way that the nature of Gaza and
I've been there I've seen no place in
the world that is more crowded with more
people and hamas's uh true policy of
using uh civilians as human Shields
putting their uh installations inside
these areas uh has led to these high
casualties uh what the administration uh
is trying to do is to minimize these
particularly now that the Israelis have
seized control of most of the north of
Gaza but do you think these High
casualties are too high are you uneasy
about them
James anybody who is not uneasy
about casualties particularly civilian
casualties uh is not you know uh looking
at this in a humane way uh but I also
look at what are the Alternatives I also
know if we're going to talk about
casualties because I was involved in
most of these wars uh some million
people killed in Iraq Syria uh Yemen uh
since
2003 uh and 15 million displaced uh this
is an extremely dangerous region or it
has been last 20 years uh and uh it
requires as soon as possible uh much
more stabilization much more security
than we have right now but of course the
US Prides itself on respecting the
rules-based international order doesn't
it Ramy and some of those Central rules
are the rules of war the Geneva
conventions um isn't Israel with its
indiscriminate bombing breaking those
most fundamental of
rules yes it's clearly it is and many
respected International groups
independent credible groups have said so
and and people in the Arab side have
broken these rules as well people in
turkey and everywhere so this is very
very common the problem is that these
rules were made by Victorious countries
after World War I in World War II and
they really are not followed very uh
very diligently uh Ambassador James was
correct to say that you know in the last
20 years we've had all these really
messy situations in the region but I
would argue that in the last the one of
the reasons for this is for the last 200
years since Napoleon we've had almost
non-stop Western military direct
intervention uh or manipulation uh of
States uh and sovereignties uh economic
systems military ties and uh leaderships
uh in throughout the whole uh Middle
East so there's a real serious problem
in the uh integrity and the efficacy of
statehood and sovereignty and
citizenship across most of the Arab
countries and other countries uh in the
Middle East and foreign direct military
involvement is one of the reasons uh for
this as well as local reasons and
particularly the continuation of 100
Years of Zionist expansion ISM
settlement settler Colonial partti
expansion which has reached the peak now
in Israel's policies the government
policies not freelance Rogues the
government's policies in Gaza and in the
in the West Bank so that at some point
the world has to uh stop issuing
platitudes and really get serious uh if
you want stability and peace you have to
do what happened in Northern Ireland uh
and in southern Africa and a few other
places where tough decisions were made
to change existing patterns and policies
and bring about real uh security and
peace because it was based on Justice
for All there's no sign of that in the
in the region and there's certainly no
sign of it in the last 30 40 Years of
the United States monopolizing Arab
Israeli peacemaking and it would be a
catastrophe if the US again led the
search for a permanent resolution after
the fighting in Gaza and the West Bank
by the way after it stops James I saw
you smile or laugh um when Ramy was
talking about settler colonialism
why um uh for the last 200 years uh
Western military Powers have moved into
the entirety of the North and South
America all of South uh uh uh subsaharan
Africa and entirely of East Asia except
for part of China and uh that's a
reality all around the world not just in
the Middle East nowhere else do we see
any I underline anything like the
Carnage we have seen in the Middle East
um not just the last 20 years but think
of the 1980s with the Iran Iraq war with
the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan
and other conflicts it is an extremely
unstable uh region whose political
leadership and uh possibly outside uh
intervention uh is not uh worthy of the
people who are suffering uh uniquely in
this
region now I've had on this program in
the last six weeks we don't have an
international lawyer here but I've had
one on many many days and I haven't yet
found one who doesn't believe that
Israel is probably breaking
International humanitarian law in other
words committing war crimes Samuel
you're there in London are the US's
allies getting uncomfortable about
this well I think that we're starting to
notice obviously some efforts to
distance from US policy towards Israel
the unconditional support I think early
on within the European Union there were
a few voices like Ireland and Spain who
are really calling for an immediate
ceasefire or really challenging Israel's
conduct in Gaza and now we're seeing
more countries follow that way I think
Emanuel macron's uh vote against the
United States and the United Nations
General Assembly over the Arab peace
resolution that was sponsored by Jordan
and then comments about the killing of
children and women is suggestive of that
Rift even in Britain itself I think the
dismissal of su rman was largely also
linked to this kind of unconditional
support for for for Israel being
challenged at DEC gra Britain has also
been a bit more cautious certainly
voting against the US on the settlement
issue abstaining on other resolutions so
there definitely is frictions within the
Western Alliance block but those
frictions really haven't boiled over
there's only a small number of states
like Spain and Ireland they're still
calling for a ceasefire within the
collective West now Biden as
commander-in Chief has sent an Amad to
the region by my count its two aircraft
carriers at least 10 warships a nuclear
submarine A detachment of Marines and
numerous fighter aircraft but if he's
trying to look strong the problem is
that every time he says something to
Israel Israel is not listening on
humanitarian pauses on bringing more Aid
in on bringing fuel in now finally
they're going to a little bit of fuel on
what happens at the end of this bringing
the Palestinian Authority in would you
agree
Ramy yeah I think there's a real dilemma
for the United States that it is the
only country that Israel really trusts
therefore it has to be centrally
involved in any kind of effort for
peacemaking that might be revived but
the Dilemma is that it's also the major
backer of the U of the Barbarian
policies that Israel the medieval Siege
and destruction policies starvation that
Israel is now implementing and and the
settler Colonial AP partide system that
Zionism introduced into this region
starting in the late 1880s and continues
today you see it in the West Bank and in
Gaza it's an extraordinary Legacy of
non-stop uh violence designed to house
the Palestinian indigenous Palestinians
who were 93 94% of the population 100
years ago in Palestine and and the
Israeli Zionist Israeli aim is to have a
Jewish State they succeeded they created
the Jewish majority state but they
haven't stopped and this is one of the
the reasons that people in the Middle
East but also really most of the third
world most of the South don't believe or
trust the United States when it says we
want a two-state solution I wish the US
really did work for a genuinely
Equitable two-state resolution of the
conflict that addresses the core needs
of both sides we've offered the Arab
world has offered that many times in
peace agreements peace offers uh but the
US has a real problem it's it's it can't
be a peacemaker if it's the principal uh
backer of the War maker your views on
that
James
um he certainly has a point with this uh
Israeli government uh it is hard to
imagine a government that has views more
different than those of Joe Biden but I
would say that uh that's this government
there's a history to this uh the United
States did support very strongly the
Oslo Accords and uh President Bill
Clinton put much of his presidency on
the table to try to get one uh Clinton's
View and he has repeated it many times
is that uh there was a deal in 2000 yat
to
town well the speech that we spoke about
at the beginning of the program four
weeks ago in the Oval Office wasn't just
about the war in Gaza it was also about
the war in Ukraine and you could argue
that this is President zelinsky's worst
nightmare what we've uh seen right now
listen to what he said in a recent
interview of course course Russia
understands that now when Focus from
Ukraine taken off and when this Focus to
the Middle East and when they try to
divide the world in this crisis Israel
palestin crisis and of course of course
Russia is very happy with this war so
what they want they just want to divide
the world so president zelinsky there
Samuel this is his worst nightmare isn't
it the attentions gone away that means
that the money and the weapons probably
aren't going to come in the same
numbers well I think it's more of a
political rather than actual military
necessity construct in fact Biden has
repeatedly said that the United States
is the most powerful country in the
world it's the only superpower it can
arm both Israel and Ukraine at once but
in practice being so actively involved
into two Wars and also upgrading the US
industrial Machinery to something of a
war footing is very very difficult to do
in an election and we're already seeing
the outcomes of that leading to a
squeeze on supplies to Ukraine Congress
has admitted that Congress holding up
the Ukraine Israel Aid bill has led to
the White House having to admit that
there's going to be smaller Aid packages
coming forward and that Aid will be
finite and we're also seeing problems
with the delivery of artillery shells
especially because Israel has asked for
and appears to have gotten the
57,5 mm shells going their way and those
shells are directly diverted from
Ukraine to the Israelis so there is a
significant uh draw down of support at a
time when Ukraine's CER events have
installed and the Russians are
escalating events of operations in ABA
so seninsky is very worried James I mean
we come back to the allegations of
double standards now I think because
Biden has called what Russia's doing a
genocide he's condemned attacks on
hospitals by Russia he's condemned
bombings of civilians by Russia and he's
condemned the force transfer of
civilians by Russia people will be
asking why is Gaza different
uh people should and the fault is Joe
Biden uh much as I like him and enjoyed
working for him uh he gets too effusive
I was a th% behind everything he has
done the International Community has
done for Ukraine but I and I know the
Russians well from Syria and elsewhere
but I was very unhappy when we're using
such language war criminal and uh uh
genocide against the Russians because I
knew this would come back and haunt us
uh this is aggression as spelled out in
the nurg trials against uh the state of
Ukraine just like uh what we had on the
7th of October was aggression against
the state of Israel both purposes were
to wipe out those States that's the
issue uh I was nervous about genocide
then I remained nervous about genocide
being used in the context of uh uh
Israel let's look at Russia's position
on global events Ramy um of course it's
not any longer a superow but perhaps
it's been boyed by the war in Gaza seems
to have thrown aside its careful
diplomacy with Israel for years and
taken quite a strong position on this
war um you could say there are ACC
accusations of hypocrisy there as
well oh absolutely most big powers are
professional Hypocrites it's it comes
with the DNA of political leadership in
the western world and probably in in the
South as well this is normal uh but so I
don't think we should worry about what
people say and if it contradicts what
they do that this applies to to
everybody I think the bigger question
here and this is what the US and Biden
are really having to confront and
they're not confronting it uh is is the
United States mandated by anybody to be
the U the maintainer of the global order
you said in the beginning the us well I
think Jim said that the US wants to
maintain the postor War I order it's
it's true that the US probably wants to
do that but nobody has given it that
mandate the UN has the mandate to do
that and the United States is facing and
Biden is facing a real serious problem
which is going to hurt more than
anything else which is his Democratic
party is fracturing and it's fracturing
along age lines generational lines the
young people are wildly against what is
happening happening in in in Palestine
and Gaza and the West Bank with direct
American support and the uh the
pressures are going to imple impact the
democ Democratic parties and Biden's
electoral fortunes uh in the elections
likely next year if things don't change
so we have domestic pressures we have
international pressures and I don't
think the United States leadership uh
has the ability uh uh to address these
issues in any coherent way it'll it'll
continue to bring in the Navy and the
and the Air Force and send in the
special forces and and talk in
apocalyptic ways about its god-given
mission to uh to support the good people
in the world so this this has very
little credibility anymore but the world
can't do much about it when the United
States uses its power the way it does so
that we need a much more sophisticated
Global Coalition of like-minded decent
countries and the US is a decent country
except when it comes to uh its foreign
policy which is military based and
supporting autocrats but we need a
better International mechanism uh to uh
achieve uh Global Order and that can
only be based on social justice and
equal rights for all parties and this is
not what Israel and Zionism are about
and this is not what the United States
has supported in practice and words of
course they support it in practice they
don't okay uh James I don't want to I'm
coming to it right at the end I don't
want to leave China out of this
discussion it is the other major power
in the world how do you think China sees
the war on Gaza because traditionally
it's not been its sphere of influence
but we have seen them involved in the
region particularly with regard to that
rosma between Saudi Arabia and
Iran um briefly China wants stability in
the region it's not ready to play a big
military or diplomatic role and it needs
the Region's hydrocarbons but more
importantly and this gets to everything
we've been hearing look what's happened
in the last few days China has met with
President Biden uh the Chinese caved on
an important American demand which is
military uh Communications but even more
importantly for the first time in eight
years China several weeks ago agreed to
talk about ballistic nuclear missiles
with the United States why because what
China sees is if the United States is
going to back Ukraine if it's going to
back uh Israel it will also back Taiwan
this is a serious International play or
we take it seriously so when I hear
about the global South and US losing
International opinion I say how is China
treating us now they're treating us like
a very serious important uh partner Ramy
finally to you um given their very
important partner do you think China and
the other world powers are going to let
at the end of this conflict the US run
the show as they have done in the past
yes the two US is talking about a
two-state solution but it sort of
abandoned the idea of a two-state
solution and went round the Palestinians
in recent
years yeah of course and everything the
US has done in terms of its policies to
Israel and the Palestinians in the
region and the last 20 years has allowed
the two-state solution to die away under
the weight of Israeli non-stop
settlements uh but the the world China
and others are going to try to play a
more constructive role if they can China
already has done things between Iran and
Saudi Arabia and other things in the
region but the reality is that nothing
will happen in Arab Israeli diplomacy
without the us being somewhere near the
center of it because they're the only
people the Israelis trust and this is
this is one of the problems we have so I
think there has to be a more serious
search for a multilateral approach that
allows the US to maintain a central role
but tempers its negative uh attitudes
and and War making and pro-israeli
sentiments tempers those so that both
the Arabs and the Israelis can actually
achieve equal rights and this is what
really we have to look for everywhere um
in the world and this can only happen
with the international mandates it can't
be a unilateral decision by the US
saying we want to do this so I would
look for more activism by global powers
to see what they can do thank you Ramy
very much and thanks to all our
panelists for joining us today Ramy
curri Samuel Romani and Ambassador James
Jeffrey 24 hours a day Al jazer will
continue to report on the war on Gaza
with our reporters around the world in
Israel in the occupied West Bank and on
the ground in Gaza you'll also find more
context and Analysis on our website
aljazera what should we discuss next
time on the program let us know your
suggestions on our Facebook page that's
facebook.com/ AJ insid story and on X
The Social Network formerly known as
Twitter we're @ AJ insid story me James
Bay and the team here in Doha I'll see
you again soon bye for
[Music]
now